What does it really mean to live in a country where abortion is no longer a constitutional right? Since 2022, when the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, many states have made it all but impossible to get abortion care within their borders, and have done their best to isolate people facing unwanted or complicated pregnancies, making them afraid to reach out to medical providers or even to friends and loved ones who might help them. New laws have forced doctors to delay care in life-threatening situations and made women afraid to seek it, leading to preventable deaths. Did anyone really want this?

Even when the consequences haven’t been that dire, the day-to-day reality of abortion in America’s left-behind places now involves navigating constant undercurrents of confusion and fear: Is this pill I found on the internet safe? If I miscarry, is anyone going to help me? Or, in the cases of some doctors: How can I help this patient without getting arrested?

We asked people at the front lines of abortion access to help us understand how the new laws have filtered into their worlds. They answered our call with texts, audio messages, videos and pictures; some shared their stories anonymously out of fear of reprisal. Taken as a whole, their dispatches show us an untenable status quo, held together by sheer grit and determination. But for how much longer?

This presidential election will be the first since the Supreme Court ruled on Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health Organization, when voters will be presented with a choice: to try to rein in the chaos unleashed by the ruling or to live in a country that continues to be shaped by it.

The stories we found were ones of women getting access — just barely. Of doctors and volunteers white-knuckling it to provide the support, funding, care required. But there are many stories of women who don’t manage to navigate the chaos, who get lost in the fault lines. As recently reported by ProPublica, shortly after Roe was overturned, a woman in Georgia died as a result of delayed access to an abortion. In her story there are echoes of the ones shared with us — unsupervised, she had complications with her medication abortion, like Chelsea. She had to travel out of state but was thwarted by circumstances beyond her control, like Evie. She needed a doctor, like Dr. Kelley, who recognized her situation as life-threatening. She was not as lucky as the women you’ve met here. How many more of her are out there? How many more will there be if we continue down this path?