This year, I visited a sprawling homeless shelter in Delhi, India, where tuberculosis was rampant. I met a boy whose parents were day laborers. Soon after their arrival there, when the boy was 6, he and his older sister became sick. They weren’t diagnosed with TB until they were critically ill. After two years of treatment, the boy survived, but his sister died, he said. It had been too little, too late for her.

Humanity has had the tools to diagnose, treat and prevent TB for decades. Because of that, this airborne bacterial respiratory disease, once the cause of about 25 percent of all deaths in the United States, is no longer a widespread threat to public health in wealthy countries. But that’s far from true in lower-income countries. While international public health efforts have cut global TB case rates by a quarter and death rates by half since 2000, it is still the world’s No. 1 infectious-disease killer. TB claims more than one million lives annually.

There are new advances in screening, prevention and treatment, however, that now make significant progress possible — if we tap them. Success requires everyone pitching in.

In countries like India with high TB burdens, the government, the private sector and civil society organizations must commit to financing and delivering the new tools to stop TB — which India is now showing can be done. Manufacturers must lower costs. And high-income countries must do their part. The United States leads the world in providing innovation, expertise and support for countries combating the disease — both directly to local teams in high-risk settings, such as the shelter I visited, and through the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria. Last year, Congress provided additional support, enabling my team at USAID to forge new agreements with hard-hit countries, including the Philippines and Ethiopia. This is a good step, but stopping the TB scourge will require that Congress sustain these investments and that other industrialized nations do more to fill gaps.

TB is a disease that feeds on poverty and social breakdown — people weakened by hunger and depleted immune systems, living in overcrowded conditions or deprived of medical care are most vulnerable. While just one in 38,000 Americans has active TB, one in 500 people in India does. Among Delhi’s homeless population, one in every 12 people has the disease — a shocking rate. This means Delhi’s homeless face among the worst TB rates in a city with some of the worst TB rates in a country with the most TB cases in the world.

The strategy that quelled TB in the United States after World War II has worked consistently wherever it has been applied: Screen all vulnerable populations to find cases, treat the infected and stop transmission by providing those exposed with preventive treatment — even if they have no symptoms. Tubercular bacteria can hide in the body for months or years before blooming into full-blown disease.

As simple as the strategy sounds, it is hard to carry out. Conventional screening tools are either expensive or slow to produce results. Common medication regimens are costly and require daily doses over months and sometimes years. The side effects can be significant, ranging from nausea to organ damage. TB treatment has been more akin to cancer chemotherapy than to the throat swab and five days of antibiotics we are used to for many bacterial infections.

Costly, complex care for the neglected and downtrodden is not an easy sell. Public funding chronically falls far short of the need — even more so for TB than for other infectious conditions. TB specialists must commonly make brutal choices about who gets access to limited supplies and who does not. The most common sacrifice is screening and preventive treatment for those exposed to TB, which means giving up on stopping transmission.

During the past couple of years, however, we have seen advances in every aspect of TB control. These advances make it possible to greatly accelerate the reduction of TB globally.

For screening, digital chest X-ray equipment has shrunk in cost and size to the point that it can be carried in a backpack and delivered in primary health care clinics. Artificial intelligence software now can read — instantly — chest X-rays for indications of TB or other conditions as accurately as radiologists can. In Nigeria, screening people with a combination of ultraportable, A.I.-assisted X-ray equipment and fast-turnaround molecular tests helped increase TB case detection by almost 40 percent in a single year.

For treatment and prevention, newer drug regimens are also shorter, more effective and less toxic. The latest preventive regimen for people exposed to TB, for example, requires just 12 weekly doses of medication instead of up to nine months of daily medications. That has more than doubled the completion rates for treatment.

There has also been progress on costs. USAID joined a consortium of nonprofit buyers that bargained down prices for TB medicines and tests by 20 percent to 55 percent last fall. This means reaching millions more people within existing budgets.

Which brings me back to the homeless shelter in Delhi, where joint efforts have brought all these tools together. I spoke to a group of teenage boys standing in line outside an open-air tent, waiting to get digitally screened for TB. I asked them why they had come. One boy said he had a cough, and he was worried it was TB. The others said they were worried they’d caught it from him.

Did they have family? No, the boy with the cough said. They looked after one another. They’d been kicked out of their homes for using drugs. They didn’t want to say what kind. I asked if the drugs scared them. No, they said. But TB did.

If the boy with the cough proved to have TB, he would now get the medications he needed and would very likely survive if he completed his treatment. And his exposed friends would get prophylactic treatment, stopping the bacterium’s spread.

Big challenges remain. Some days the Indian government’s supply of medicines for the shelter I visited runs short. Other similar locations with high TB burdens still await the complete package of X-rays, tests and treatments. But in India, unlike most countries, the government has greatly increased TB funding, to more than $1.8 billion over the past four years. Combined with community and private-sector efforts, that is producing results nationwide. Nearly 90 percent of estimated TB cases are now being diagnosed.

Treatment success rates are just as high. And the number of those exposed receiving preventive medication has jumped exponentially.

In a place with one of the highest TB rates on earth, I saw that the disease could be stopped with the new tools available. And still more are coming. Clinical trials of five TB vaccines with promising early results are now underway. After decades without major advances, we now have a steady stream of innovations. But they won’t matter unless the world commits to deploying them.